First draft of Digital Identity Anchor Specificaiton (#200)
uncefact/spec-untp: website/docs/specification/DigitalIdentityAnchor.md

---
sidebar_position: 25
title: Digital Identity Anchor
---

import Disclaimer from '../\_disclaimer.mdx';

<Disclaimer />

## Artifacts 

Are maintained at - https://test.uncefact.org/vocabulary/untp/dia/0/about

### Stable Releases For Implementation

Version 1.0 stable release for production implementation is due Feb 2025

### Release for Pilot Testing

Version 0.5.0 release artifacts (when available) are suitable for pilot testing.

### Latest Development Version

Latest development versions are used to reflect lessons learned from pilots but should not be used for either pilot testing or production purposes. 

* JSON-LD @context - https://test.uncefact.org/vocabulary/untp/dia/0.1.0/
* JSON Schema - https://test.uncefact.org/vocabulary/untp/dia/untp-dia-schema-0.1.0.json

> * Sample Instance - https://test.uncefact.org/vocabulary/untp/dia/untp-dia-instance-0.1.0.json

Author: yes - but they are in a different repo and workflow (jargon -> github -> AWS host).  Maybe we need to change all that but it's the way it is for now.

> * Sample Instance - https://test.uncefact.org/vocabulary/untp/dia/untp-dia-instance-0.1.0.json

Author: will do

### Version History

History of releases is available from the [Version history](https://test.uncefact.org/vocabulary/untp/dia/0/versions) page.

## Overview

> The Digital Identity Anchor (DIA) credential provides a simple means to verify the identity of UNTP credential issuers. The `issuer.id` property of all UNTP credentials is defined as a W3C decentralised identifier (DID) so that credentials like product passports can be cryptographically verified as genuinely issued by the holder of the DID. But, as a self-issued identity, the DID does not provide confidence that the issuer is really who they claim to be. Authoritative identity registers such as national business registers, trademark registers, and land registers exist in most countries and have well established and trusted registration and maintenance processes. Unfortunately, most authoritative registers only issue paper or PDF registration certificates that are easily faked and are not usable for digitally verifiable proof of identity. The UNTP DIA is essentially a digitally verifiable version of a registration certificate. It is issued by the authoritative register to authenticated members when the member proves ownership of their DID to the register. When a DIA accompanies a UNTP credential such as a DPP, a verifier can confirm not only that the DPP was issued by the holder of the DID, but also that the holder of the DID is also the holder of the authoritative registered identity.  

Reviewer: Also, you are the `controller` of a DID, not `holder`.

![Digital Identity Anchor Concept](DigitalIdentityAnchor.png)

The outcome is that the subject of the DIA (eg the VAT registered business) can prove that they are the registered identity to any other party. In the UNTP context the DIA provides assurance that a DPP (or DCC/DFR/DTE) issuer really is who they say they are. The verification workflow is as follows

* A verifier (eg buyer of an identified product) discovers a DPP for the product and verifies the credential - confirming that the DPP has not been tampered-with, is genuinely issued by party identified by the issuer DID.
* The DID is resolvable to the DID document which contains a link to the DIA in the DID document `service` end point.
* Verify the DIA credential and confirm that the DPP issuer DID is contained in the `verifiedDIDList` of the DIA.  

> * Confirm that the issuer did:web of the DIA (the authoritative register) is on the white list of trust anchors.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Confirm that the issuer `did:web` of the DIA (the authoritative register) is on the white list of trust anchors.  
```

The DIA can also be used for similar trust anchoring purposes such as:

* Accreditation authorities issue DIA to assert that a conformity assessment body is accredited against a given scheme.  
* IP Offices issue DIA to assert that a registered party is the genuine owner of a trademark. 
* Land registers issue DIA to assert that a regulated party is the owner of a geo-located property.

## Requirements

The digital identity anchor is designed to meet the following detailed requirements as well as the more general [UNTP Requirements(https://uncefact.github.io/spec-untp/docs/about/Requirements)]

| ID | Name  | Requirement Statement   | Solution Mapping  |
| ------ | ---- | --------- | ---------- |

> | DIA-01 | DID Verification | The DIA issuer (registrar) SHOULD confirm that the registered member (subject) is the legitimate holder of a DID before issuing a DIA credential so that the registrar is protected against members falsely claiming ownership of well known DIDs| MAY use the [DID Auth](https://w3c-ccg.github.io/vp-request-spec/#did-authentication) protocol for this purpose. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| DIA-01 | DID Verification | The DIA issuer (registrar) MUST confirm that the registered member (subject) is the legitimate controller of a DID before issuing a DIA credential so that the registrar is protected against members falsely claiming ownership of well known DIDs| MAY use the [DID Auth](https://w3c-ccg.github.io/vp-request-spec/#did-authentication) protocol for this purpose. |
```

Reviewer: I'd say that's a MUST. Otherwise this attestation isn't worth much if we hand wave around binding it to the DID.

Reviewer: And again: you are the DID controller, not holder

Author: Yep - fixed in latest commit.

> | DIA-02 | DIA Issuer DID | The DIA issuer MUST use did:web (or a trusted variant such as did:tdw) as the DIA issuer and the web domain MUST match the well known domain of the issuing authority so that verifiers can confirm authority identity via public web records.| DIA issuer specification|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| DIA-02 | DIA Issuer DID | The DIA issuer MUST use `did:web` as the DIA issuer and the web domain MUST match the well known domain of the issuing authority so that verifiers can confirm authority identity via public web records.| DIA issuer specification|
```

Reviewer: I object to requirements with vaguely defined optionality

Author: fair enough - I removed the did:tdw stuff - we can reference it formally later if/when it becomes a well supported method.

| DIA-03 | Scheme registration | The DIA issuing authority SHOULD register the identity scheme (including the trusted issuer DIDs) with the UN/CEFACT identifier scheme registry so that verifiers can leverage UN maintained scheme metadata to simplify DIA discovery and verification.| See UNTP [Identity Resolver](IdentityResolver.md)|

> | DIA-04 | Subject DID List | The DIA MUST allow multiple subject DIDs to be linked to the same registered identity so long as proof of ownership is verified for each - so that members can rotate multiple active DIDs | `VerfiedDIDList` property|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| DIA-04 | Subject DID List | The DIA MUST allow multiple subject DIDs to be linked to the same registered identity so long as proof of ownership is verified for each - so that members can rotate multiple active DIDs | `verfiedDIDList` property|
```

Reviewer 2: I`m not a fan of the `verifiedDIDList` concept, it implies the holder would have to engage in multiple did auths with the same DIA issuer. I would rather start with a `credentialSubject.id` did and explore the need for `verifiedDIDList` with some tangible use case.

Author: removed the DIDList in the latest commit.

> | DIA-05 | Scope List| The DIA MUST include a list of scope URIs that unambiguously define the authorised role(s) of the member in the register so that verifiers can confirm the scope of the membership. | `scopeList` property |

Reviewer: What is this? 
It's not in the examples below.

Reviewer: Oh, it's `registrationScopeList` is it?

| DIA-06 | Register Type| The DIA MUST specify the register type so that verifiers can understand the context of the `scopeList`| `registerType` property|
| DIA-07 | DIA Discovery| The DIA SHOULD be discoverable given either the DID or the registeredID| [DIA Discovery](#dia-discovery)|

The examples below help to clarify the application of DIA-05 and DIA-06.

## Logical Model

The Digital Identity Anchor logical model.

![Digital Product Passport data model](DigitalIdentityAnchor.svg)

### Core Vocabulary Documentation

The [UNTP core types vocabulary](https://jargon.sh/user/unece/untp-core/v/0.5.0/artefacts/readme/render) defines the uniquely identified Linked Data entities such as Product, Location, Facility, Party, Standard, Regulation, Criteria, Declaration, Attestation, Endorsement. The Digital Identity Anchor only re-uses the UNTP core `VerifiableCredential` and `Identifier` classes.

### DIA Documentation

The [DIA documentation](https://jargon.sh/user/unece/DigitalIdentityAnchor/v/0.1.0/artefacts/readme/render) provides a technology-neutral definition of classes, properties and code lists in the DIA model.

## Implementation Guidance

> This section provides sample JSON-LD snippets for each DIA component.

Reviewer: Well, pseudo LD, actually

Author: sounds like a topic for discussion - but hopefully wont block this PR

### Digital Identity Anchor

> The Digital Identity Anchors is a Verifiable credential. Please refer to [DPP VC Guidance](DigitalProductPassport.md#verifiable-credential) for information about the use of the verifiable credentials data model for UNTP.  THe issuing party for the VC MUST be the authority that owns or operates the identity register. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Digital Identity Anchors is a Verifiable credential. Please refer to [DPP VC Guidance](DigitalProductPassport.md#verifiable-credential) for information about the use of the verifiable credentials data model for UNTP.  The issuing party for the VC MUST be the authority that owns or operates the identity register. 
```

Reviewer: This seems like a weak link. How do we guard against malicious issuers of this credential pointing at a legitimate public registry?

Reviewer 2: I would rather see a pattern of including this DIA in a presentation. I would consider the [linked-vp spec](https://identity.foundation/linked-vp/#use-cases), leveraged as a [whois](https://identity.foundation/trustdidweb/#whois-linkedvp-service) mechanism

### Registered Identity

The registered identity class represents the registry member. For example, in a national business register, the registered identity would be one of the registered businesses.

* `type` MUST contain constant value array `["RegisteredIdentity", "Identifier"]` which declares to linked data processors that this is a registered identity which is a sub-type of identity.
* the `id` MUST contain the globally unique member identifier as maintained in the register.  Often this will be a web link to the member entry.
* `name` is the human readable registered entity name and SHOULD match the registered name as it appears in the authoritative register.
* `registeredId` contains the simple identifier value that is unique within the register (but may not be globally unique) for example the VAT registration number.

> * `idScheme` identifies the authoritative register.  If the identity scheme is registered with UN/CEFACT then the `idScheme.id` MUST match the `identityRegister.id` in the UN/CEFACT scheme register.

Reviewer: This feels inelegant.

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, I would rather see the organization's did as the `id` value.

Author: yes - will update the model and generated artefacts accordingly

* `registerType` is a coded value that allows verifiers to distinguish between different DIA [use cases](#use-cases)
* `verifiedDIDList` contains an array of DIDs that the member has requested (and the registrar has verified) to be linked to the registeredId of the member.
* `registrationScopeList` contains a list of URIs that define the scope of the member registration. The values are very specific to the register. For example a national business register would typically have a controlled vocabulary of entity types (eg [Australian Entity Types](https://abr.business.gov.au/Help/EntityTypeList))

```json
  "credentialSubject": {
    "type": [
      "RegisteredIdentity",
      "Identifier"
    ],

>     "id": "https://sample-register.gov/90664869327",

Reviewer: I suggest we switch it around. Subject `id` is the DID. This is what verifiers are interested in, so let's not add "proprietary" paths to get to it. 
Add whatever registration URLs in an array. That part is less essential.

Reviewer 2: +1 to this

Author: agreed - will update and republish the model

    "name": "Sample business Ltd",
    "registeredId": "90664869327",
    "idScheme": {
      "type": [
        "IdentifierScheme"
      ],
      "id": "https://sample-register.gov",
      "name": "Sample National Business Register"
    },
    "registerType": "Business",

>     "verifiedDIDList": [

Reviewer: Inelegant. This should be `credentialSubject.id`

Reviewer 2: also +1, I would like to see some real world exploration about the use case for a `verifiedDIDList`, there's alot to consider by going down this path

Author: There are real world scenarios (see https://github.com/uncefact/spec-untp/issues/37#issuecomment-2458213130) but I think we all agree for now that they are better handled with multiple DIAs rather than one DIA with a DID list.  Will update the model accordingly

      "did:web:samplecompany.com/123456789",
      "did:ethr:0x5:0xf3beac30c498d9e26865f34fcaa57dbb935b0d74"
    ],
    "registrationScopeList": [
      "https://sample-register.gov/EntityType?Id=00019"
    ]
  }
```

## DIA Discovery

DIA credentials SHOULD be discoverable from either identifier:

> * Given a DID (eg as the issuer of a DPP) via DID document `service` end point.

Reviewer 2: Do we return the credential or a presentation? I think a presentation would make sense, and I would refer to the linked-vp spec since this is exactly what it looks to do. TDW will likely be merged with did:web in the near future, and there's the [implicit `whois` service](https://identity.foundation/trustdidweb/#whois-linkedvp-service), which can also be listed explicitly. This gives a clear instruction as to what this service should resolve to.

* Given a registered identifier (eg a VAT registration number) via the ID scheme resolver service.

> ### Via DID Service EndPoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Via DID Service Endpoint
```

Author: fixed, thank you

As described in the [W3C Decentralized Identifiers](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/) specification, DIDs are resolvable to a DID document. The `service` property of a DID document contains an array of typed `serviceEndpoint` which can point to services or credentials relevant to the DID. A DID document may also contain an "alsoKownAs" property which is typically used to reference other identifiers. Controllers of DIDs that are linked to authoritative register SHOULD

> * Add the ID URI from the authoritative register to the `alsonKnownAs` list. In the snippet below `https://sample-register.gov/90664869327` has been added.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand this. Not all governments offer a direct link to a registration, often time it will be a query service. I'd put this as an optional step.
